July newsletter (#601)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2023-07-21-news-july-2023/index.Rmd

    )
english <- function(x) {
  as.character(english::english(x))
}

nice_string <- function(...) {
  glue::glue_collapse(..., sep = ", ", last = ", and ")
}
```
<!-- Before sending DELETE THE INDEX_CACHE and re-knit! -->

Dear rOpenSci friends, it's time for our monthly news roundup!
<!-- blabla -->
You can read this post [on our blog](`r url`).
Now let's dive into the activity at and around rOpenSci!

## rOpenSci HQ

### Open Call for rOpenSci Champions Program Applications! 

We are pleased to [open the call](/blog/2023/07/14/call-champions-program/) for the second cohort of Champions and Mentors for the rOpenSci Champions Program 🎉 ! 

This 12-month-long program will continue to support our goal of identifying, recognizing, and rewarding passionate community members who help the community grow and improve.  The activities include cohort-based training, project development, and personal mentorship.

This program focuses on people who belong to groups that are historically and systematically excluded from the open software and research software communities and who are interested in contributing to rOpenSci and the broader open source and research software communities.

> You can apply, for being a _champion_ or a _mentor_, until **September 4th**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can apply to be a _champion_ or a _mentor_ until **September 4th**.
```

> More information on eligibility, timeline, curriculum, application process, etc. is [on the program webpage](/blog/2023/07/14/call-champions-program/). 

Reviewer: Or change the link text to "on the blog post"
```suggestion
More information on eligibility, timeline, curriculum, application process, etc. is [on the program webpage](/champions/). 
```

> ### Community call: Mentoring & training program for Scientific Open Source Champions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Community call: Mentoring & Training Program for Scientific Open Source Champions
```

Tuesday, 25 July 2023 14:00 UTC. [More info](/commcalls/july2023-championprogram/).

Champions programs are designed to identify, recognize, and reward emerging leaders within a community. The [rOpenSci Champions Program](/champions/) is part of a series of activities and projects we are carrying out to ensure our research software serves everyone in our communities, which means that it needs to be sustainable and open, and built by and for all groups.

On this [call](/commcalls/july2023-championprogram/) _Beatriz Milz_, _Victor Ordu_ and _Carolina Pradier_ will share their experience of being rOpenSci mentors and champions. 
We will highlight the benefits of being part of the program for you and for your community, what kind of learning, 
activities and opportunities an open source community champions program provides. 

> _Yani_ will present the details of our Champion Program and answer all your question about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rOpenSci Community Manager _Yani_ will present the details of our Champion Program and answer all your questions about it.
```

### CRAN packages on R-universe

#### All CRAN packages indexed on R-universe!

> We have now indexed all CRAN packages on r-universe.dev. You can use the r-universe [powersearch](/blog/2023/02/27/runiverse-discovering/#level-1-searching-the-entire-r-ecosystem) to find any CRAN package with a particular topic, author, datasets etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have now indexed all CRAN packages on [r-universe.dev](https://r-universe.dev). You can use the R-universe [powersearch](/blog/2023/02/27/runiverse-discovering/#level-1-searching-the-entire-r-ecosystem) to find any CRAN package with a particular topic, author, datasets etc.
```

#### R-universe cran.dev shortlinks

> You can now use cran.dev shortlinks: `https://cran.dev/{package}`, `https://docs.cran.dev/{package}` to fly directly to the r-universe dev page or html manual for any CRAN package!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now use cran.dev shortlinks: `https://cran.dev/{package}`, `https://docs.cran.dev/{package}` to fly directly to the R-universe dev page or html manual for any CRAN package!
```

Example: <https://cran.dev/xml2> and <https://docs.cran.dev/xml2>.

### Coworking

Read [all about coworking](/blog/2023/06/21/coworking/) in our new [post](/blog/2023/06/21/coworking/)!

Join us for social coworking & office hours monthly on first Tuesdays! 
Hosted by Steffi LaZerte and various community hosts. 
Everyone welcome. 
No RSVP needed. 
Consult our [Events](/events) page to find your local time and how to join.

- Tuesday, August 1st, 09:00 Americas Pacific (16:00 UTC), ["Spatial data in R"](/events/coworking-2023-08/) *Hosted by [Mike Mahoney](/author/mike-mahoney) and [Steffi LaZerte](/author/steffi-lazerte/)*
    - Work on a project related to spatial data.
    - Explore R packages for working with spatial data.

> 

Reviewer: Just in case I don't get the details by Thursday, but I'm hoping to have them!
```suggestion
- Tuesday, September 5th, 09:00 Australia Western (01:00 UTC), TBA
- **Note** October coworking is cancelled (see you in November!)

```

commits <- gh::gh(
  "GET /repos/{owner}/{repo}/commits",
  owner = "ropensci",
  repo = "roregistry",
  since = sprintf(
    "%s-%s-%sT00:00:00Z",
    lubridate::year(since),
    stringr::str_pad(lubridate::month(since), 2, "0", side = "left"),
    stringr::str_pad(lubridate::day(since), 2, "0", side = "left")
  ),
  until = sprintf(
    "%s-%s-%sT00:00:00Z",
    lubridate::year(until),
    stringr::str_pad(lubridate::month(until), 2, "0", side = "left"),
    stringr::str_pad(lubridate::day(until), 2, "0", side = "left")
  )
)

empty <- TRUE
i <- length(commits)
while (empty == TRUE) {
  old <- "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ropensci/roregistry/%s/packages.json" %>%
    sprintf(commits[[i]]$sha) %>%
    jsonlite::read_json() %>%
    purrr::map_df(function(x) tibble::tibble(package = x$package, url = x$url, branch = x$branch))
  i <- i - 1
  if (nrow(old) > 100) {
    empty <- FALSE
  }
}

old <- dplyr::filter(
  old,
  !grepl("ropenscilabs\\/", url),
  !grepl("ropensci-archive\\/", url)
)

new <- dplyr::filter(
  registry,
  !package %in% old$package,
  !grepl("ropenscilabs\\/", url),
  !grepl("ropensci-archive\\/", url)
)
```

> The following `r if(nrow(new)>1) english(nrow(new))` package`r if(nrow(new)>1) "s"` recently became a part of our software suite:

Reviewer: Remove this section if no new packages? 😱

Refer to our somewhat [recent blog post](/blog/2022/10/17/maintain-or-co-maintain-an-ropensci-package/#packages-looking-for-co-maintainers) to identify other packages where help is especially wished for!
See also our [help wanted page](/help-wanted/) -- before opening a PR, we recommend asking in the issue whether help is still needed.

## Package development corner

Some useful tips for R package developers. :eyes:

### Check for partial matching as part of your testing & CI process

You can change your options to generate warnings on partial matching:

```r
options(
  warnPartialMatchAttr = TRUE,
  warnPartialMatchDollar = TRUE,
  warnPartialMatchArgs = TRUE 
)
```

But your options and [Rprofile](https://rstats.wtf/r-startup.html#rprofile) are ignored by R CMD check.

A way to still get warnings in your continuous integration is to integrate it to testthat by creating a [special `setup-options.R` file](https://blog.r-hub.io/2020/11/18/testthat-utility-belt/), as in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/packagetemplate/pull/61. This file could also be used to change any other options (but use with caution to not create situations where it's too difficult to debug).

> Thanks to [Hugo Gruson](https://hugogruson.fr/) for this tip!

Reviewer: Link to the rOpenSci author page since that links to all his profiles?
```suggestion
Thanks to [Hugo Gruson](/author/hugo-gruson/) for this tip!
```

### Change in R-devel for comparing versions

Does your package compare version with code snippets like `some_version >= 1.5`?
If so, you might encounter the warning below with R-devel.

```
Condition
  Warning in `.make_numeric_version()`:
  invalid non-character version specification 'x' (type: double)
```

[Reference](https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=18548), [toot](https://mastodon.social/@zkamvar@fosstodon.org/110634968544104625).

> To avoid it, you need to make your comparison a character vector:
`some_version >= '1.5'` 

[Example commit fixing this, in usethis](https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/commit/a5e80b516154309dd28d09e642ea7e7b6c7e723a).

> Thanks to [Zhian Kamvar](https://zkamvar.netlify.app/) for this!

Reviewer: As above?
```suggestion
Thanks to [Zhian Kamvar](author/zhian-n.-kamvar/) for this!
```
